Add Hello-channels, stub for containers etc and reorder training modules (#391)
nextflow-io/training: docs/hello_nextflow/05_hello_channels.md

# Part 4: Hello Channels

> In Part 2, you built a pipeline that was completely linear and processed each sample's data independently of the others. However, in real pipelines, you may need to combine data from multiple samples, or combine different kinds of data. Here we show you how to use channels and channel operators to implement a pipeline with more interesting plumbing.

Reviewer: 2->3 
```suggestion
In Part 3, you built a pipeline that was completely linear and processed each sample's data independently of the others.
However, in real pipelines, you may need to combine data from multiple samples, or combine different kinds of data.
Here we show you how to use channels and channel operators to implement a pipeline with more interesting plumbing.
```

Specifically, we show you how to implement joint variant calling with GATK, building on the pipeline from Part 2.

!!! note

    Don't worry if you're not familiar with GATK or genomics in general. We'll summarize the necessary concepts as we go, and the workflow implementation principles we demonstrate here apply broadly to any use case that follows a similar pattern.

### Method overview

> The GATK variant calling method we used in Part 2 simply generated variant calls per sample. That's fine if you only want to look at the variants from each sample in isolation, but that only yields limited information. It's often more interesting to look at variant calls across multiple samples, and to do so, GATK offers an alternative method called joint variant calling, which we demonstrate here.

Reviewer: tweaked wording
```suggestion
The GATK variant calling method we used in Part 3 simply generated variant calls per sample.
That's fine if you only want to look at the variants from each sample in isolation, but that only yields limited information.
It's often more interesting to look at variant calls differ across multiple samples, and to do so, GATK offers an alternative method called joint variant calling, which we demonstrate here.
```

> Joint variant calling involves generating a special kind of variant output called GVCF (for Genomic VCF) for each sample, then combining the GVCF data from all the samples and finally, running a 'joint genotyping' analysis to produce the final cohort-level VCF containing variant calls calculated based on the information from all samples.

Reviewer: We describe this process a few times below, let's make this explanation simpler.
```suggestion
Joint variant calling involves generating a special kind of variant output called GVCF (for Genomic VCF) for each sample, then combining the GVCF data from all the samples and finally, running a 'joint genotyping' statistical analysis.
```

![Joint analysis](img/joint-calling.png)

> What's special about a sample's GVCF is that it contains records summarizing sequence data statistics about all positions in the targeted area of the genome, not just the positions where the program found evidence of variation. This is critical for the joint genotyping calculation. _TODO: ADD LINK FOR MORE READING_

Reviewer: Added link
```suggestion
What's special about a sample's GVCF is that it contains records summarizing sequence data statistics about all positions in the targeted area of the genome, not just the positions where the program found evidence of variation.
This is critical for the joint genotyping calculation ([further reading](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035890431-The-logic-of-joint-calling-for-germline-short-variants)).
```

> The GVCF is produced by GATK HaplotypeCaller, the same tool we used in Part 2, with an additional parameter (`-ERC GVCF`). Combining the GVCFs is done with GATK GenomicsDBImport, which combines the per-sample calls into a data store (analogous to a database), then the actual 'joint genotyping' analysis is done with GATK GenotypeGVCFs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GVCF is produced by GATK HaplotypeCaller, the same tool we used in Part 2, with an additional parameter (`-ERC GVCF`).
Combining the GVCFs is done with GATK GenomicsDBImport, which combines the per-sample calls into a data store (analogous to a database), then the actual 'joint genotyping' analysis is done with GATK GenotypeGVCFs.
```

So to recap, we're going to develop a workflow that does the following:

> 
> _ADD joint genotyping FLOWCHART_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: I have another flowchart to add so this needs to stay in

<figure class="excalidraw">
--8<-- "docs/hello_nextflow/img/haplotype-caller.excalidraw.svg"
</figure>

1. Generate an index file for each BAM input file using Samtools
2. Run the GATK HaplotypeCaller on each BAM input file to generate a GVCF of per-sample genomic variant calls
3. Collect all the GVCFs and combine them into a data store
4. Run joint genotyping on the combined GVCF data store to produce a cohort-level VCF

### Dataset

-   **A reference genome** consisting of a small region of the human chromosome 20 (from hg19/b37) and its accessory files (index and sequence dictionary).

> -   **Three whole genome sequencing samples** corresponding to a family trio (mother, father and son), which have been subset to a small portion on chromosome 20 to keep the file sizes small. The sequencing data is in [BAM](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf) (Binary Alignment Map) format, i.e. genome sequencing reads that have already been mapped to the reference genome.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **Three whole genome sequencing samples** corresponding to a family trio (mother, father and son), which have been subset to a small portion on chromosome 20 to keep the file sizes small.
    The sequencing data is in [BAM](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf) (Binary Alignment Map) format, i.e. genome sequencing reads that have already been mapped to the reference genome.
```

Just like previously, we want to try out the commands manually before we attempt to wrap them in a workflow.

!!! note

     Make sure you're in the correct working directory:
     `cd /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow`

### 0.1. Index a BAM input file with Samtools

This first step is the same as in Part 2: Hello-GATK so you can skip it if you've already done that in this session.

#### 0.1.1. Pull the samtools container

```bash
docker pull community.wave.seqera.io/library/samtools:1.20--b5dfbd93de237464
```

#### 0.1.2. Spin up the container interactively

```bash
docker run -it -v ./data:/data community.wave.seqera.io/library/samtools:1.20--b5dfbd93de237464
```

#### 0.1.3. Run the indexing command

```bash
samtools index /data/bam/reads_mother.bam
```

#### 0.1.4. Check that the BAM index has been produced

```bash
ls /data/bam/
```

This should show:

```console title="Output"
reads_father.bam      reads_mother.bam      reads_mother.bam.bai  reads_son.bam
```

Where `reads_mother.bam.bai` has been created as an index to `reads_mother.bam`.

#### 0.1.5. Exit the container

```bash
exit
```

### 0.2. Call variants with GATK HaplotypeCaller in GVCF mode

> This second step is **different** from Part 2: Hello-GATK, since now we are running GGATK in 'GVCF mode', so you **should NOT skip it**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This second step is **different** from Part 2: Hello-GATK, since now we are running GATK in 'GVCF mode', so you **should NOT skip it**.
```

We add the reserved keyword `script:` to declare the start of the script section explicitly, and we use some string manipulations to construct the `${gvcfs_line}`:

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf"
    """
    gatk GenomicsDBImport \
        -V ${gvcfs} \
        --genomicsdb-workspace-path ${cohort_name}_gdb
    """
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf"
    script:
    def gvcfs_line = gvcfs.collect { "-V ${it}" }.join(' ')
    """
    gatk GenomicsDBImport \
        ${gvcfs_line} \
        --genomicsdb-workspace-path ${cohort_name}_gdb
    """
```

In this new code, `gvcfs.collect { "-V ${it}" }.join(' ')` takes each GVCF path (referenced by `${it}`), adds the `-V ` prefix then joins the resulting strings into a single string formatted correctly for the GenomicsDBImport tool.

### 2.7. Run the workflow to verify that it generates the GenomicsDB output as expected

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf -resume
```

Now we see the additional process show up in the log output (showing the compact view):

_TODO: Update console output_

_TODO: check the output_

### Takeaway

> Now you know how to collect outputs from a channel and bundle them as a single input to another process. You also know how to construct a command line to provide the file names to the tool with the appropriate syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you know how to collect outputs from a channel and bundle them as a single input to another process.
You also know how to construct a command line to provide the file names to the tool with the appropriate syntax.
```

We need to rename the process call from GATK_GENOMICSDB to GATK_JOINTGENOTYPING; and since the expanded process requires the reference genome files as inputs, we need to provide them in the GATK_JOINTGENOTYPING process call.

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf"
// Combine GVCFs into a GenomicsDB datastore
GATK_GENOMICSDB(
    all_gvcfs,
    all_idxs,
    params.cohort_name
)
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf"
// Combine GVCFs into a GenomicsDB datastore and apply joint genotyping
GATK_JOINTGENOTYPING(
    all_gvcfs,
    all_idxs,
    params.cohort_name,
    ref_file,
    ref_index_file,
    ref_dict_file
)
```

### 3.6. Run the workflow

Finally, we can run the modified workflow!

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf -resume
```

The output should look like this:

```console title="Output"
N E X T F L O W  ~  version 24.02.0-edge
Launching `hello-channels.nf` [nauseous_thompson] DSL2 - revision: b346a53aae
executor >  local (7)
[d1/43979a] process > SAMTOOLS_INDEX (2)       [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
[20/247592] process > GATK_HAPLOTYPECALLER (3) [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
[14/7145b6] process > GATK_JOINTGENOTYPING (1)      [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
```

> You can find the final output file, `family_trio.joint.vcf`, in the work directory for the last process. Click on it to open it and you'll see 40 lines of metadata header followed by just under 30 jointly genotyped variant records (meaning at least one of the family members has a variant genotype at each genomic position listed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find the final output file, `family_trio.joint.vcf`, in the work directory for the last process.
Click on it to open it and you'll see 40 lines of metadata header followed by just under 30 jointly genotyped variant records (meaning at least one of the family members has a variant genotype at each genomic position listed).
```
